Science is knowledge. As a result, much of science is devoted to confirming
that existing theory is indeed knowledge, or at least an accurate model to gain
true knowledge. Unfortunately, no matter how hard scientists try, elements of
hubris, religion, or expectation have a tendency to infect science. This
pursuit of knowledge, and its human, imperfect tendencies are the main subject
of the book "A Brief History of Time" by Stephen Hawking. In particular, we see
ego supporting the idea the earth is the center of the universe, and rejecting
the model of earth being just another example. Another example is religion
causing many to reject (or perhaps too hastily accept) the (now generally
accepted) theory of the big bang.

First, lets look at the evolution of our idea of Earth in relation to the rest
of the universe. Somewhat famously, the prevailing system of thought held the
earth as being flat, with the sun, stars, moon, and other planets rotating
around this plane. This theory was adapted by Ptolemy into that of a spherical
Earth with other spherical celestial bodies such as the Sun, Moon, planets, and
stars rotating in circles around the Earth. This model had some notable flaws:
in order for the model to predict the positions of the various celestial bodies
correctly, Ptolomy held that the Moon followed a path in which its distance
varied by a factor of 2 over the course of time. In other words, it was twice
as far during its farthest state, than in its closest state. Naturally, this
model's depiction of the Earth - and therefore humans - being the center of the
universe appealed to human ego and so was generally accepted by the scientists
of the time. Perhaps more importantly, this model's adherence to scripture
caused it to be fully endorsed by the Christian Church.

Our second example comes from the idea of the universe having a beginning. Of
course, this theory had been popular in religious frameworks for a long time,
but its first scientific, or logical justification came from the German
philosopher Heinrich Olbers. His skepticism of the current model of an infinite
static universe stemmed from the fact that in such a universe, the entire sky
should shine as bright as the sun. Some counter arguments such as the
interference of other matter were presented and quickly refuted. Olbers
realized that the only explanation for not all of us being blind was that the
stars had not been shining in perpetuity, but rather for a finite amount of
time, "turning" on and then eventually of after their lifetime had been
exhausted. Despite this relatively convincing line of thought, many
philosophers / physicists of the time (including the great Aristotle) objected
to this idea merely based merely off its divine flavouring. Instead they tried
to defend their idea with arguments with (in my opinion) increasing hilarity.
For example: when confronted with the argument that humanity would have
advanced much farther in a non-finite universe, it was suggested that periodic
floods forced human civilisation to reset. Here we see, that residual distrust
of the church had an objectively negative effect on the progression of science.

In conclusion, we see that religion and ego have a notable effect on the
advancement on science. Religion due both to its stubborn adherence to
scripture, as well as what could be described as a stigma against religiously
accepted positions in sciencee (at least in much older times). In terms of ego
we see that humans - even scientists - tend towards ideas which appeal to their
ego (although this is greatly mitigated by modern methods). All in all, science
is a human endeavour, and our human qualities cause imperfections in our
science.
